Notice and choice has become the FTC's main focus in dealing with privacy issues raised by the collection of smartphone data. This seems to be in light of the practicality of such methods. The concept of notice and choice lends itself very well to a practical regulation practice. That is to say, it is easy to enforce. The FTC simple must encourage companies to post privacy policies, which it can assume users will read, thus filling the notice stipulation. Choice comes along for free as this is up to the consumer entirely. The consumer either can choose to do business with said company or not. 

Of course the issue of choice becomes slightly complicated when factoring real world scenarios. Take for example the situation where Sally is walking home one night and is confronted by a man with a gun. The man holds the gun to Sally's head and says, "if you give me your purse, I will not shoot you". The robber has informed Sally of the proposal he intends to put her under, thus fufilling his duty to notice. Also, he has also given sally a choice, give up the purse or be shot. In this example the consequences are quite exaggerated however it is useful to see that a choice that is clearly not acceptable for the accepting party is more of an allusion of choice than an actual one. Who in their right mind would agree to being shot!? 

The methaphor comes back to the issue of tracking users on their smartphones, the notice is clearly given by application developers through means of a privacy policy, but the choice resembles that of Sally's prediciment. The only choice that consumers have against information gathering is to not use the service altogether. What's more, there are very rarely alternatives that offer a privacy policy that is more aligned with the consumers wishes. So it becomes more than just a consumer not using a certain smartphone application, but, in order to remain private, having to refrain from using nearly ANY smartphone application. This is not a valid choice. 


