Chapter 13
The Failure of
Fair Information Practice Principles
[from Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy (2006)]
Fred H. Cate1
Indiana University
Modern data protection law is built on “fair information practice principles”
(FIPPS). At their inception in the 1970s and early 1980s, FIPPS were broad,
aspirational, and included a blend of substantive (e.g., data quality, use limitation)
and procedural (e.g., consent, access) principles. They reflected a wide consensus
about the need for broad standards to facilitate both individual privacy and the
promise of information flows in an increasingly technology-dependent, global
society.
As translated into national law in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere
during the 1990s and 2000s, however, FIPPS have increasingly been reduced to
narrow, legalistic principles (e.g., notice, choice, access, security, and
enforcement). These principles reflect a procedural approach to maximizing
individual control over data rather than individual or societal welfare.
As theoretically appealing as this approach may be, it has proven unsuccessful
in practice. Businesses and other data users are burdened with legal obligations
while individuals endure an onslaught of notices and opportunities for often
limited choice. Notices are frequently meaningless because individuals do not see
them or choose to ignore them, they are written in either vague or overly technical
language, or they present no meaningful opportunity for individual choice. Trying
to enforce notices no one reads has led in the United States to the Federal Trade
Commission’s tortured legal logic that such notices create enforceable legal
obligations, even if they were not read or relied upon as part of the deal.
Moreover, choice is often an annoyance or even a disservice to individuals.
For example, the average credit report is updated four times a day in the United
States. How many people want to be asked to consent each time? Yet how
meaningful is consent if it must be given or withheld for all updates as a group?
How meaningful is a credit reporting system if individuals can selectively choose
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1156972344
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
what to include and exclude? Most people appear to go out of their way to avoid
making choices about information collection and use; if forced to, they are often
ill-equipped to appreciate the risks either to our privacy or the benefits that may be
lost if information is not available.
In addition, many services cannot be offered subject to individual choice.
Requiring choice may be contrary to other activities important to society, such as
national security or law enforcement, or to other values, such as freedom of
communication. This explains why so many laws that purport to invest individuals
with control over information about them exempt so many activities: it simply is
not feasible or desirable to provide for individual control (or, in many cases, notice
or access either).
Enforcement of notice, choice, and the other FIPPS is uneven at best.
Individuals are rarely in a position to know if personal information about them has
been used in violation of some prior notice that they received or consent that they
gave. Situations likely to threaten greatest harm are often subject to the least
oversight, while innocuous or technical violations of FIPPS may be prosecuted
vigorously if they are the subject of a specific law or obligation and they can be
used to generate popular or political pressure. This was documented by the
disclosure during 2005 that tens of millions of business records containing
personal information in the United States, Japan, and other countries had been
hacked, stolen, or lost. Experts observed that this has been going on for years.
Until these disclosures, however, regulators had addressed information security,
part of all sets of FIPPS, only when privacy notices made representations about
security that were later demonstrated to be untrue.2
In short, the control-based system of data protection, with its reliance on
narrow, procedural FIPPS, is not working. The available evidence suggests that
privacy is not better protected. The flurry of notices may give individuals some
illusion of enhanced privacy, but the reality is far different. The result is the worst
of all worlds: privacy protection is not enhanced, individuals and businesses pay
the cost of bureaucratic laws, and we have become so enamored with notice and
choice that we have failed to develop better alternatives. The situation only grows
worse as more states and nations develop inconsistent data protection laws with
which they attempt to regulate increasingly global information flows.
This chapter reflects a modest first step at articulating an approach to privacy
laws that does not reject notice and choice, but does not seek to rely on it for all
purposes. Drawing on other forms of consumer protection, in which standards of
protection are not negotiable between providers and consumers, I propose that
national governments stop subjecting vast flows of personal data to restraints
based on individual preferences or otherwise imposing the considerable transaction
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1156972The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
345
costs of the current approach. Instead, I propose that lawmakers reclaim the
original broader concept of FIPPS by adhering to Consumer Privacy Protection
Principles (CPPPS) that include substantive restrictions on data processing
designed to prevent specific harms.
The CPPPS framework is only a first step. It is neither complete nor perfect,
but it is an effort to return to a more meaningful dialogue about the legal regulation
of privacy and the value of information flows in the face of explosive growth in
technological capabilities in an increasingly interconnected, global society.
The Evolution of Fair Information Practice Principles
According to Professor Paul Schwartz, a leading scholar of data protection law in
the United States and Europe, “[f]air information practices are the building blocks
of modern information privacy law.”3 Marc Rotenberg, president of the Electronic
Privacy Information Center, has written that “Fair Information Practices” have
“played a significant role” not only in framing privacy laws in the United States,
but in the development of privacy laws “around the world” and in the development
of “important international guidelines for privacy protection.”4 In fact, so
important are these principles that Rotenberg writes of them only in capital letters,
like one might refer to the Bible or the Koran. What are FIPPS and from where did
they originate?
The HEW Code of Fair Information Practices
In the early 1970s, mounting concerns about computerized databases prompted the
U.S. government to examine the issues they raised—technological and legal—by
appointing an Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems in the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare. The Advisory Committee issued its
report, Records, Computers and the Rights of Citizens, in 1973.5 In that report, the
Advisory Committee called on Congress to adopt a “Code of Fair Information
Practices,” based on five principles:
1. There must be no personal data record-keeping systems whose very existence
  is secret.
2. There must be a way for a person to find out what information about the
  person is in a record and how it is used.
3. There must be a way for a person to prevent information about the person that
  was obtained for one purpose from being used or made available for other
 purposes without the person’s consent.
346
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
4. There must be a way for a person to correct or amend a record of identifiable
  information about the person.
5. Any organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminating records of
  identifiable personal data must assure the reliability of the data for their
 intended use and must take precautions to prevent misuses of the data.6
These principles may be described in more contemporary terms as reflecting
five FIPPS: transparency, use limitation, access and correction, data quality, and
security. They were the basis for the Privacy Act, which Congress adopted the
following year.7
Privacy Protection Study Commission Principles
The Privacy Act created a Privacy Protection Study Commission to examine the
wide range of privacy issues in greater detail. The Commission reported to
President Carter in 1977.8 Its report articulated three fundamental objects for any
data protection system, and a number of specific recommendations for how those
objectives might be achieved.
1.
To create a proper balance between what an individual is expected to divulge
to a record-keeping organization and what he seeks in return (to minimize
intrusiveness).9
The Commission recommended that “that individuals be informed more fully
than they now are of the information needs and collection practices of a record-
keeping organization in advance of committing themselves to a relationship with
it.”10 The reason was simple: “If the individual is to serve as a check on
unreasonable demands for information or objectionable methods of acquiring it, he
must know what to expect so that he will have a proper basis for deciding whether
the trade-off is worthwhile for him.”11
The Commission also recommended “that a few specific types of information
not be collected at all.”12 The Commission’s example—arrest information in “the
employment and personnel area”—suggests that the real concern was use, rather
than collection.13
The Commission proposed certain limitations on “information collection
methods.” “In general, the Commission believes that if an organization, public or
private, has declared at the start its intent to make certain inquiries of third parties,
and to use certain sources and techniques in doing so, it should be constrained only
from exceeding the scope of its declaration.”14 The Commission also
recommended that “private-sector record keepers be required to exerciseThe Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
347
reasonable care in selecting and retaining other organizations to collect
information about individuals on their behalf.”15
As a final step to minimize the intrusiveness of information gathering, the
Commission recommended “having governmental mechanisms both to receive
complaints about the propriety of inquiries made of individuals and to bring them
to the attention of bodies responsible for establishing public policy.”16 The
Commission was quick to point out, however, “that such complaints require the
most delicate public-policy response.”17 As a result, the Commission expressed a
preference “to see such concerns addressed to the greatest possible extent by
enabling the individual to balance what are essentially competing interests within
his own scheme of values.”18
2.
To open up record-keeping operations in ways that will minimize the extent to
which recorded information about an individual is itself a source of unfairness
in any decision about him made on the basis of it (to maximize fairness).19
In the Commission’s view, maximizing fairness required assuring that records
about individuals “are as accurate, timely, complete, and relevant as is necessary to
assure that they are not the cause of unfairness in any decision about the individual
made on the basis of them.”20 This is best achieved, according to the Commission,
by giving the individual the “right to see, copy, and correct or amend records about
himself.”21 The Commission also noted that fairness “includes the responsibility to
apprise individuals that records have or will be created about them, and to have
reasonable procedures for assuring the necessary accuracy, timeliness,
completeness, and relevance of the information in the records they maintain about
individuals, including a responsibility to forward corrections to other organizations
under specified circumstances.”22
The Commission concluded that fairness was served in some situations by
“requiring the individual’s authorization” and by ensuring that a “disclosure should
include no more of the recorded information than the authorized request for
disclosure specifies.”23
3.
To create and define obligations with respect to the uses and disclosures that
will be made of recorded information about an individual (to create
legitimate, enforceable expectations of confidentiality).24
The Commission recommended “that a legally enforceable ‘expectation of
confidentiality’ be created in several areas.” According to the Commission’s
report, the “concept of a legally enforceable expectation of confidentiality has two
distinct, though complementary, elements.”25 The first is “an enforceable duty of
the record keeper which preserves the record keeper’s ability to protect itself from348
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
improper actions by the individual, but otherwise restricts its discretion to disclose
a record about him voluntarily.”26 The second is “a legal interest in the record for
the individual which he can assert to protect himself against improper or
unreasonable demands for disclosure by government or anyone else.”27
The Privacy Protection Study Commission report reflects perhaps the broadest
array of FIPPS in a U.S. context, although the breadth of those principles is
mitigated somewhat by the fact that most would apply in only certain situations or
where specified types of information were involved.
The OECD Guidelines
The HEW Code of Fair Information Practices and the report of the Privacy
Protection Study Commission played a significant role in the development of the
Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data
by the Committee of Ministers of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in 1980.28 The OECD Guidelines identified eight principles to
“harmonise national privacy legislation and, while upholding such human rights,
...at the same time prevent interruptions in international flows of data.”29 They
were designed to “represent a consensus on basic principles which can be built into
existing national legislation” and to “serve as a basis for legislation in those
countries which do not yet have it.”30 In this aspiration they have undoubtedly
succeeded because most of the dozens of national and regional privacy regimes
adopted after 1980 claim to reflect the OECD Guidelines.
The Guidelines identified eight principles:
1. Collection Limitation Principle—There should be limits to the collection of
    personal data and any such data should be obtained by lawful and fair means
   and, where appropriate, with the knowledge or consent of the data subject.
2. Data Quality Principle—Personal data should be relevant to the purposes for
    which they are to be used, and, to the extent necessary for those purposes,
   should be accurate, complete and kept up-to-date.
3. Purpose Specification Principle—The purposes for which personal data are
    collected should be specified not later than at the time of data collection and
   the subsequent use limited to the fulfillment of those purposes or such others
  as are not incompatible with those purposes and as are specified on each
 occasion of change of purpose.
4. Use Limitation Principle—Personal data should not be disclosed, made
    available or otherwise used for purposes other than those specified in
The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
349
accordance with [the Purpose Specification Principle] except: (a) with the
consent of the data subject; or (b) by the authority of law.
5. Security Safeguards Principle—Personal data should be protected by
    reasonable security safeguards against such risks as loss or unauthorised
   access, destruction, use, modification or disclosure of data.
6. Openness Principle—There should be a general policy of openness about
    developments, practices and policies with respect to personal data. Means
   should be readily available of establishing the existence and nature of
  personal data, and the main purposes of their use, as well as the identity and
 usual residence of the data controller.
7. Individual Participation Principle—An individual should have the right: (a) to
    obtain from a data controller, or otherwise, confirmation of whether or not the
   data controller has data relating to him; (b) to have communicated to him, data
  relating to him within a reasonable time; at a charge, if any, that is not
 excessive; in a reasonable manner; and in a form that is readily intelligible to
him; (c) to be given reasons if a request made under subparagraphs(a) and (b)
is denied, and to be able to challenge such denial; and (d) to challenge data
relating to him and, if the challenge is successful to have the data erased,
rectified, completed or amended.
8. Accountability Principle—A data controller should be accountable for
    complying with measures which give effect to the principles stated above.31
Under the OECD Guidelines, data processors have certain obligations without
regard for the wishes of individual data subjects. For example, the data quality and
security safeguards principles appear non-negotiable. Other obligations are stated
more broadly and may be affected by individual consent. For example, under the
use limitation and purpose specification principles, the use of personal data is
restricted to the purposes for which the data were collected, purposes “not
incompatible with those purposes,” and other purposes to which the data subject
consents or that are required by law. Still other principles—for example, the
openness and individual participation principles—are designed entirely to facilitate
individual knowledge and participation.
The breadth of the OECD Guidelines’ purposes (including both protecting
privacy and facilitating multinational data flows), principles, and language,
reflecting a real-world flexibility and proportionality, undoubtedly help explain
their wide adoption and wide acclaim.350
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
The EU Data Protection Directive Principles
In 1990 the Commission of the then-European Community published a draft
Council Directive on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing
of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data.32 The draft directive
was part of the ambitious program by the countries of the European Union to
create not merely the “common market” and “economic and monetary union”
contemplated by the Treaty of Rome,33 but also the political union embodied in the
Treaty on European Union signed in 1992 in Maastricht.34 The shift from
economic to broad-based political union brought with it new attention to the
protection of information privacy. After substantial amendment, the directive was
formally approved on October 24, 1995.35 Beginning three years later, each of the
then-15 member states of the European Union were required to adopt national data
protection laws in compliance with the directive’s terms.
The directive is a long and detailed document, but it reflects a series of data
protection principles that have been articulated by a “Working Party on the
Protection of Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal Data,”
composed of national data protection commissioners and charged under article 29
of the directive with interpreting key portions of the directive. According to the
Working Party, the following principles are central to the directive:
1. The purpose limitation principle—data should be processed for a specific
    purpose and subsequently used or further communicated only insofar as this is
   not incompatible with the purpose of the transfer... [W]here data are
    transferred for the purposes of direct marketing, the data subject should be
   able to “opt-out” from having his/her data used for such purposes at any stage.
2. The data quality and proportionality principle—data should be accurate and,
    where necessary, kept up to date. The data should be adequate, relevant and
   not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are transferred or
  further processed.
3. The transparency principle—individuals should be provided with information
    as to the purpose of the processing and the identity of the data controller...,
     and other information insofar as this is necessary to ensure fairness...
4. The security principle—technical and organizational security measures,
    should be taken by the data controller that are appropriate to the risks
   presented by the processing. Any person acting under the authority of the data
  controller, including a processor, must not process data except on instructions
 from the controller.
The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
351
5. The rights of access, rectification and opposition—the data subject should
    have a right to obtain a copy of all data relating to him/her that are processed,
   and a right to rectification of those data where they are shown to be
  inaccurate. In certain situations he/she should also be able to object to the
 processing of the data relating to him/her...
6. Restrictions on onward transfers—further transfers of the personal data by the
    recipient of the original data transfer should be permitted only where the
   second recipient (i.e. the recipient of the onward transfer) is also subject to
  rules affording an adequate level of protection.36
7. Sensitive data—where “sensitive” categories of data are involved [data
        concerning “racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious beliefs,
         philosophical or ethical persuasion...[or] concerning health or sexual life”37]
            additional safeguards should be in place, such as a requirement that the data
           subject gives his/her explicit consent for the processing.
8. Automated individual decision—where the purpose of the transfer is the
    taking of an automated decision..., the individual should have the right to
     know the logic involved in this decision, and other measures should be taken
    to safeguard the individual’s legitimate interest.38
Finally, two enforcement principles emerge from the directive. The first—the
independent oversight principle—requires that entities that process personal data
not only be accountable but also be subject to independent oversight. In the case of
the government, this requires oversight by an office or department that is separate
and independent from the unit engaged in the data processing. Under the data
protection directive, the independent overseer must have the authority to audit data
processing systems, investigate complaints brought by individuals, and enforce
sanctions for noncompliance.39
The second enforcement principle—the individual redress principle—requires
that individuals have a right to pursue legally enforceable rights against data
collectors and processors who fail to adhere to the law. This principle requires not
only that individuals have enforceable rights against data users, but also that
individuals have recourse to courts or a government agency to investigate and/or
prosecute noncompliance by data processors.40
As discussed below, national legislation implementing the directive has
tended to focus more on notice and consent than these principles suggest.
Nevertheless, these ten principles mark the high-water mark of substantive legal
protection for information privacy. Subsequent enactments in Canada, Japan, and
other countries have followed similarly broad and substantive FIPPS.352
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
The FTC Privacy Principles
Beginning in the mid-1990s, the Federal Trade Commission and states attorneys
general encouraged U.S. operators of commercial websites to adopt and publish
online privacy policies. Adoption of such policies was voluntary; compliance with
them was not. The Commission interprets section five of the Federal Trade
Commission Act, which empowers the FTC to prosecute “unfair and deceptive”
trade practices, to include violations of posted privacy policies.41
In 1998, the FTC reported to Congress on what it believed a privacy policy
must contain.42 After reviewing the “fair information practice codes” of the United
States, Canada, and Europe, the Commission concluded: “Common to all of these
documents are five core principles of privacy protection:”
1. Notice/Awareness—The most fundamental principle is notice. Consumers
    should be given notice of an entity’s information practices before any
     personal information is collected from them. Without notice, a consumer
    cannot make an informed decision as to whether and to what extent to
   disclose personal information. Moreover, three of the other principles
  discussed below—choice/consent, access/participation, and enforcement/
   redress—are only meaningful when a consumer has notice of an entity’s
      policies, and his or her rights with respect thereto.
2. Choice/Consent—The second widely-accepted core principle of fair
    information practice is consumer choice or consent. At its simplest, choice
   means giving consumers options as to how any personal information collected
  from them may be used. Specifically, choice relates to secondary uses of
 information—i.e., uses beyond those necessary to complete the contemplated
  transaction.
3. Access/Participation—Access...refers to an individual’s ability both to access
        data about him or herself—i.e., to view the data in an entity’s files—and to
             contest that data’s accuracy and completeness. Both are essential to ensuring
              that data are accurate and complete. To be meaningful, access must
             encompass timely and inexpensive access to data, a simple means for contes-
            ting inaccurate or incomplete data, a mechanism by which the data collector
           can verify the information, and the means by which corrections and/or con-
          sumer objections can be added to the data file and sent to all data recipients.
4. Integrity/Security—[D]ata must be accurate and secure. To assure data
    integrity, collectors must take reasonable steps, such as using only reputable
   sources of data and cross-referencing data against multiple sources, providing
  consumer access to data, and destroying untimely data or converting it to
 anonymous form.
The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
5.
353
Enforcement/Redress—It is generally agreed that the core principles of
privacy protection can only be effective if there is a mechanism in place to
enforce them. Absent an enforcement and redress mechanism, a fair
information practice code is merely suggestive rather than prescriptive, and
does not ensure compliance with core fair information practice principles.43
The FTC’s 1998 report is a remarkable landmark along the evolution of
modern FIPPS for two reasons. First, it is noteworthy for having reduced prior
collections of eight or ten principles down to five. (In 2000, the FTC issued a
second privacy report to Congress which removed enforcement/redress, thereby
reducing the list to four principles.44) Although this might be thought to reflect the
FTC’s focus, which was limited to website privacy policies, the Commission cites
to the full range of FIPPS documents and identifies these five as the “core
principles of privacy protection” that those documents have in common.
Second, it is striking that the chosen five (or four) principles were, with the
exception of security, procedural. Substantive obligations concerning fairness and
data quality were ignored in favor of procedural requirements concerning notice,
choice, access, and enforcement. In terms of FTC law, the Commission was
relying on its power to prohibit “deceptive” trade practices—i.e., practices that did
not conform to published privacy policies—rather than its power to prohibit
“unfair” trade practices.
The APEC Privacy Framework
The most recent set of FIPPS was adopted by the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation forum in 2004.45 A conscious effort to build on the OECD Guidelines,
but to modernize them in light of more than 20 years’ experience and the
escalating demand for standards that facilitate multinational data flows, the APEC
Privacy Framework includes nine principles:
1. Preventing Harm—Recognizing the interests of the individual to legitimate
    expectations of privacy, personal information protection should be designed to
   prevent the misuse of such information. Further, acknowledging the risk that
  harm may result from such misuse of personal information, specific
 obligations should take account of such risk, and remedial measures should be
proportionate to the likelihood and severity of the harm threatened by the
collection, use and transfer of personal information.
2. Notice—Personal information controllers should provide clear and easily
    accessible statements about their practices and policies with respect to
   personal information...All reasonably practicable steps shall be taken to
    ensure that such notice is provided either before or at the time of collection of
354
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
personal information. Otherwise, such notice should be provided as soon after
as is practicable.
3. Collection Limitation—The collection of personal information should be
    limited to information that is relevant to the purposes of collection and any
   such information should be obtained by lawful and fair means, and where
  appropriate, with notice to, or consent of, the individual concerned.
4. Uses of Personal Information—Personal information collected should be used
    only to fulfill the purposes of collection and other compatible or related
   purposes except: (a) with the consent of the individual whose personal
  information is collected; (b) when necessary to provide a service or product
 requested by the individual; or, (c) by the authority of law and other legal
instruments, proclamations and pronouncements of legal effect.
5. Choice—Where appropriate, individuals should be provided with clear,
    prominent, easily understandable, accessible and affordable mechanisms to
   exercise choice in relation to the collection, use and disclosure of their
  personal information. It may not be appropriate for personal information
 controllers to provide these mechanisms when collecting publicly available
information.
6. Integrity of Personal Information—Personal information should be accurate,
    complete and kept up-to-date to the extent necessary for the purposes of use.
7. Security Safeguards—Personal information controllers should protect
    personal information that they hold with appropriate safeguards against risks,
   such as loss or unauthorized access to personal information, or unauthorized
  destruction, use, modification or disclosure of information or other misuses.
 Such safeguards should be proportional to the likelihood and severity of the
harm threatened, the sensitivity of the information and the context in which it
is held, and should be subject to periodic review and reassessment.
8. Access and Correction—Individuals should be able to: (a) obtain from the
    personal information controller confirmation of whether or not the personal
   information controller holds personal information about them; (b) have
  communicated to them, after having provided sufficient proof of their identity,
 personal information about them...; and, (c) challenge the accuracy of
  information relating to them and, if possible and as appropriate, have the
 information rectified, completed, amended or deleted.
9. Accountability—A personal information controller should be accountable for
    complying with measures that give effect to the Principles stated above. When
   personal information is to be transferred to another person or organization,
The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
355
whether domestically or internationally, the personal information controller
should obtain the consent of the individual or exercise due diligence and take
reasonable steps to ensure that the recipient person or organization will
protect the information consistently with these Principles.46
The principles of the APEC Privacy Framework closely track the OECD
Guidelines, however, with greater attention on notice and choice and a new
principle—prevention of harm—added.
Fair Information Practice Principles in Operation
Which FIPPS?
As the preceding discussion suggests, one initial problem of basing a data
protection regime on FIPPS is determining which set of FIPPS to apply. The
OECD Guidelines provide eight, the EU data protection directive eleven, and the
FTC principles only five (or four).
The differences are often quite substantive. For example, only the OECD
Guidelines and APEC Framework provide an explicit collection limitation
principle: “There should be limits to the collection of personal data and any such
data should be obtained by lawful and fair means and, where appropriate, with the
knowledge or consent of the data subject.”47 The EU data protection directive gets
there obliquely, by defining “processing” to include “data collection” and then
providing a purpose limitation principle to processing, but it is not a principle that
the Article 29 Working Party considered “core.” The other FIPPS, including the
FTC principles, have no collection limitation principle at all: processors are free to
collect whatever data they wish so long as they provide an accurate notice.
Similarly, the principle of openness or transparency is explicitly provided
only in the OECD Guidelines, the HEW Code, and the EU data protection
directive. There is no mention of it in the FTC principles or the APEC Privacy
Framework. In those FIPPS, the broader goal of transparency has been reduced to
mere notice. The data quality principle—the requirement that data be “accurate,
complete, and up-to-date”—is completely missing from the FTC principles. The
EU directive and the APEC Privacy Framework introduce entirely new principles
that are found nowhere else: restrictions on onward transfers, special protection for
sensitive data, limits on automated decision-making, and prevention of harm.
Finally, there are significant differences in terminology and levels of
abstraction among the various FIPPS. What is the difference between “collection
limitation,” “purpose specification,” and “use limitation,” all three of which appear356
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
in the OECD Guidelines, and how do they compare with “purpose limitation” as
that term is used to describe the EU directive? Does the latter include all three of
the former? Some FIPPS, like the APEC Privacy Framework, provide considerable
detail, but still rely on qualifying phrases such as “where appropriate.” Others are
considerably more vague.
The end result is significant differences among various sets of FIPPS, with the
EU directive at one end of the spectrum, providing widespread limits on the
processing of personal data with few countervailing interests explicitly
acknowledged; the OECD Guidelines and APEC Privacy Framework in the
middle, with explicit recognition of the need for balance and proportionality; and
the FTC principles at the other end of the spectrum, with the fewest substantive
restrictions (although perhaps the most rigorously enforced procedural ones) on
data processors. Advocates of building national or regional data protection regimes
based on FIPPS face the challenge of first clarifying which FIPPS they mean.
The Focus on Consumer Control
Many sets of FIPPS, and particularly those adopted since the OECD’s 1980
guidelines, have been implemented to reflect a distinct goal of data protection as
empowering consumers to control information about themselves, as opposed to
protecting individuals from uses of information about them that are unfair or
harmful. Alan Westin in his groundbreaking 1967 study, Privacy and Freedom,
defined privacy as “the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine
for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is
communicated to others.”48 By the 1990s, the focus on control had become the
hallmark of data protection, especially in the United States, as aptly described by
New York Times columnist William Safire: “excepting legitimate needs of law
enforcement and public interest, control of information must rest with the person
himself.”49
This is not just a U.S. phenomenon and it is not entirely new. Multinational
FIPPS have long reflected this focus, but it has grown in prominence in more
recent sets of principles and in their application. For example, the OECD 1980
Guidelines provided that “[p]ersonal data should not be disclosed, made available
or otherwise used for purposes other than those specified in accordance with [the
Purpose Specification Principle] except: (a) with the consent of the data subject; or
(b) by the authority of law.”50
The EU data protection directive, as discussed in greater detail below, is
significantly focused on individual choice. According to the directive, data
protection is achieved through substantive “obligations imposed on persons...
responsible for processing,” and through “the right conferred on individuals, theThe Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
357
data on whom are the subject of processing, to be informed that processing is
taking place, to consult the data, to request corrections and even to object to
processing in certain circumstances.”51
By the adoption of the APEC Privacy Framework in 2004, the focus on choice
was unmistakable. It is evident in many of the principles, and especially the choice
principle: “Where appropriate, individuals should be provided with clear,
prominent, easily understandable, accessible and affordable mechanisms to
exercise choice in relation to the collection, use and disclosure of their personal
information.”52
All of these data protection instruments reflect the same approach: tell
individuals what data you wish to collect or use, give them a choice, grant them
access, secure those data with appropriate technologies and procedures, and be
subject to third-party enforcement if you fail to comply with these requirements or
individuals’ expressed preferences. All of these elements serve individual choice
and each is meaningless without that choice. For example, what good is notice or
access if the individual has no control over the information? Professor Schwartz
has described this focus as “privacy-control”:
Most scholars, and much of the law in this area, work around a liberal paradigm
that we can term “privacy-control.” From the age of computer mainframes in the
1960s to the current reign of the Internet’s decentralized networks, academics and
the law have gravitated towards the idea of privacy as a personal right to control
the use of one’s data.53
The Focus on Notice and Choice
The most immediate evidence of the migration from substantive rules for data
protection to procedural steps for enhancing individual control is the fact that in
the past two decades most FIPPS have been applied in practice to require primarily
notice and, in some instances, choice. This is especially clear in the United States,
where the FTC first narrowed the OECD’s eight principles down to five—notice,
choice, access, security, and enforcement—and then later abandoned enforcement
as a “core” principle.54 Describing notice as “the most fundamental principle,” the
FTC has focused virtually all of its privacy-related efforts on getting websites to
post privacy policies and its enforcement efforts on suing website operators when
they fail to follow those policies.
What is immediately striking about the FTC’s approach is not only its
exclusion of most FIPPS, but also its transformation of collection limitation,
purpose specification, use limitation, and transparency into mere notice and
consent. Under the former principles, personal data may only be collected by358
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
“lawful and fair means,” may only be used for the purposes for which they were
collected and other compatible purposes, and must be handled under a “general
policy of openness about development, practices and policies.”55 Consent is
relevant only as a usual condition for data collection and as an exception to the use
limitation principle (i.e., personal data may be used for other purposes with the
consent of the data subject). The other conditions are non-negotiable.
The FTC’s approach reflects more than its awareness of the importance of the
market economy and the role that personal information plays in it,56 and more than
just the limits imposed on regulating information by the First Amendment.57 It
reflects a materially different orientation towards data protection than that of
earlier FIPPS. For example, the FTC’s approach eliminates the requirements that
data collection be “fair,” that data not be used for incompatible purposes, and that
data processing operations generally be open. Moreover, the FTC’s approach, as
discussed in further detail below, reduces notice and consent to a mere formality—
a checkbox that consumers must select to obtain a desired product or service. By
treating disclosures as legal notices, the FTC’s approach infects them with legal
technicalities and minutia appropriate for a contract but not for a consumer
disclosure. The Commission’s approach allows the notice to contain virtually
anything, irrespective of how unfair or unrelated its provisions may be. Most
importantly, it has substituted procedural protections, which have often proved
ineffective, for substantive ones, such as the consumer protection standards it
applies in other areas.
U.S. statutes and regulations have tended to follow or parallel the FTC’s
control-based approach. For example, in 1999 Congress passed major financial
privacy legislation as Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Services
Modernization Act.58 Ironically, Title V contains only three substantive restrictions
on the use of personal information: prohibitions on sharing account numbers with
third parties for marketing purposes, on pretext calling, and on transfers of
personal information to third parties for marketing purposes if the data subject has
opted out.
The real focus of the new law is on procedural requirements. The law permits
a financial institution to transfer any “nonpublic personal information” to
nonaffiliated third parties only if the institution “clearly and conspicuously”
provides consumers with a notice about its information disclosure policies and an
opportunity to opt out of such transfers.59 That notice must be sent at least annually
even if there is no change in its terms. The act provides many exceptions to the
notice and consent requirements when, for example, the use of information is
necessary to provide a product or service requested by a customer, protect against
fraud or other liability, or comply with applicable laws.60The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
359
As this example suggests, notice and choice statutes often provide consumers
with few meaningful choices. Gramm-Leach-Bliley, in fact, allows for just one:
consumers can opt out of some, but not all, transfers of personal information to
third parties for marketing purposes. As a practical matter, therefore, consumers’
only serious choice in response to the legally required notices is to choose to take
their business elsewhere, assuming there is another financial institution that
discloses preferable data processing practices.
A second example of the focus on notice and, to a lesser degree, choice is
found in the rules for protecting the privacy of personal health information adopted
in 2001 by the Department of Health and Human Services, under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.61 As amended in 2002,62 the rules
regulate the use of information that identifies, or reasonably could be used to
identify, an individual, and that relates to physical or mental health, the provision
of health care to an individual, or payment for health care.63 The rules apply to
“covered entities,” namely, anyone who provides or pays for health care in the
normal course of business, and, indirectly, to anyone who receives protected health
information from a covered entity.64
A covered entity may use personal health information to provide, or obtain
payment for, health care only after first providing the patient with notice and
making a good faith effort to obtain an “acknowledgment.”65 Notices must meet
detailed requirements set forth in the rules; proof of providing notice and
acknowledgments must be retained for six years after the date on which service is
last provided.66
A covered entity may use personal health information for most purposes other
than treatment or payment only with an individual’s opt-in “authorization.”67 An
“authorization” must be an independent document that specifically identifies the
information to be used or disclosed, the purposes of the use or disclosure, the
person or entity to whom a disclosure may be made, and other information.68 A
covered entity may not require an individual to sign an authorization as a condition
of receiving treatment or participating in a health plan.69
A covered entity may use or disclose personal health information for
directories and to notify and involve other individuals in the care of a patient if the
covered entity obtains the “agreement” of the individual.70 An agreement need not
be written, provided that the individual is informed in advance of the use and has
the opportunity to opt out of any disclosure.71
The health privacy rules thus provide more opportunities for consumer
consent than the financial privacy provisions, but many uses of personal health
information do not require consent. Even the ones that do are subject to a number360
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
of exceptions, under which personal health information may be disclosed, usually
to government agencies, with neither consent nor authorization.72 The health
privacy rules well illustrate the growing complexity of notice and consent
requirements: one rule to deal with the use of one type of information requires the
use of three different types of notice and consent.
The focus on notice and consent is not limited to the United States. Despite
the considerably broader array of data protection principles identified in the EU
data protection directive, the directive and national laws within Europe transposing
it have tended to focus on notice and consent. For example, article 7 of the
directive provides seven conditions under which personal data may be processed.
The first is “the data subject has unambiguously given his consent.”73 Article 8
restricts the processing of sensitive data, but then provides that the restriction shall
not apply where “the data subject has given his explicit consent to the processing
of those data.”74 Article 10 lays out the detailed information that must be given to
the data subject before personal data are collected from him or her; article 11
provides for the same notice to be provided when data are collected from a third
party. Article 14 covers the withdrawal of consent by the data subject. Article 26
identifies six exceptions to the provision prohibiting the export of personal data to
non-European countries lacking “adequate” data protection. The first is that “the
data subject has given his consent unambiguously to the proposed transfer.”75
It is simply not accurate to say, as some EU officials have recently tried to do,
that the directive is not concerned with notice and consent. By its own terms, it
plainly is. Many of its substantive protections can be waived with consent.
Moreover, it has been applied in practice to focus on notice and consent. Some
national data protection authorities have tried to reduce the role of consent by
arguing that consent cannot be freely given in certain circumstances, such as
employment relationships. This creates an ironic conundrum: a data protection law
that conditions data processing on consent and an enforcement mechanism that
questions whether consent is possible. This facilitates neither individual choice nor
the flow of information that are among the directive’s intended goals.
Many Notices that Few People Read
The result of the focus on notice and consent in U.S., European, and other laws has
been an avalanche of notices and consent opportunities. The irony is that they are
widely ignored by the public. There are many explanations.
First, the notices may never be received. In fact, most requests for consumer
consent never reach the eyes or ears of their intended recipient. According to the
U.S. Postal Service, 52 percent of unsolicited mail in this country is never read.76
Similar figures are reported by companies about the rates at which their marketingThe Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
361
e-mail are opened by consumers. For example, one of the United States’ largest
on-line service providers indicated in 2002 that 58 percent of its marketing e-mails
sent to its own customers were never opened.77
In 1997, U.S. West (now Qwest Communications), one of the largest
telecommunications companies in the United States, tested a variety of methods
for seeking consent from its customers to use information about their calling
patterns (e.g., volume of calls, time and duration of calls, etc.)—to market new
services to them.78 In the trial of outbound calls, U.S. West found that it took an
average of 4.8 dialing attempts to reach a live respondent with authority to
consent. Of all the residential customers that U.S. West attempted to contact, 55
percent never received the offer or request for consent, even after multiple calling
attempts.79
Second, the available evidence indicates that individuals tend to ignore
privacy policies and consent requests if they can. The chief privacy officer of
Excite@Home told an FTC workshop on profiling that the day after 60 Minutes
featured his company in a segment on Internet privacy, only 100 out of 20 million
unique visitors to its website accessed that company’s privacy pages.80 According
to an independent research firm’s analysis, an average of .3 percent of Yahoo users
read its privacy policy in 2002. Even at the height of the publicity firestorm
created in March 2002 when Yahoo changed its privacy policy to permit
advertising messages by e-mail, telephone, and mail, that figure rose only to 1
percent.81 This is by no means limited to privacy notices. It appears to be true of
most mandated disclosures, whether medical informed consent forms, mortgage
disclosure forms, or license terms on software packages and splash screens.
Third, even when privacy notices are received, the evidence suggests they
usually fail to provoke any significant response—positive or negative. The
difficulty of prompting any response from consumers was clearly demonstrated by
the lack of response to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley financial privacy notices. Under
that law, by July 1, 2001, the tens of thousands of “financial institutions” to which
it applies had mailed approximately 2 billion or more notices.82 If ever consumers
would respond, this would appear to be the occasion: The notices came in an
avalanche, the press carried a wave of stories about the notices, privacy advocates
trumpeted the opt-out opportunity and offered online services that would write opt-
out requests for consumers, and the information at issue—financial information—
is among the most sensitive and personal to most individuals.
By mid-August 2001, fewer than 5 percent of consumers had opted out of
having their financial information shared with third parties. For many financial
institutions, the response rate was lower than 1 percent.83 A late September survey
revealed that 35 percent of the 1001 respondents could not recall even receiving a362
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
privacy notice, even though the average American had received a dozen or more.84
Extensive experience with company-specific and industry-wide opt-out lists
suggests that this is not atypical. The lack of consumer response to Gramm-Leach-
Bliley prompted then-FTC Chairman Timothy Muris to comment at the end of
2001:
The recent experience with Gramm-Leach-Bliley privacy notices should give
everyone pause about whether we know enough to implement effectively broad-
based legislation based on notices. Acres of trees died to produce a blizzard of
barely comprehensible privacy notices. Indeed, this is a statute that only lawyers
could love—until they found out it applied to them.85
Privacy scholar Amitai Etzioni has noted that European citizens rarely, if
ever, are asked for explicit permission to use personal information about them. In
fact, he tells of regularly asking his European audiences if anyone has ever been
asked to opt-in. Etzioni reports only one positive response—from a man who was
asked for opt-in consent by Amazon.com, a U.S. company.86
The difficulties of reaching and provoking a response from consumers are
greatly exacerbated where the party wishing to use the information has no (and
may not have ever had) direct contact with the consumer. For example, most
mailing lists are obtained from third parties. For a secondary user to have to
contact every person individually to obtain consent to use the names and addresses
on the list would cause delay, require additional contacts with consumers, and
almost certainly prove prohibitively expensive. And it could not be done without
using the very information that the secondary user is seeking consent to use.
Notices that Few People Understand
Many observers have noted that privacy policies are often difficult to
understand. There is good reason for this. Because the FTC and states attorneys
general have determined to treat notices as binding contracts, the people who draft
them are understandably worried about being precise and inclusive. Moreover, as
data protection laws and regulations become more complex, so do the notices
required by those enactments.
It should also be noted that there is real disagreement about what makes a
good privacy notice. On June 18, 2001, at a hearing on financial privacy of the
California General Assembly’s Committee on Banking and Finance, the
Committee Chairman distributed American Express’ privacy notice and challenged
the financial services industry representatives in the audience to live up to the
standard set by this “model.” Two weeks later, on July 9, 2001, USA Today
editorialized in favor of clearer privacy notices, citing American Express’ notice—The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
363
the same notice lauded only two weeks earlier—at its first example of a notice that
was difficult to comprehend.87
As a result, privacy notices in the United States have become long and
complex. In fact, eBay counsel Kent Walker has written that notices often suffer
from:
“Overkill”—“masses of unintelligible small print that no one bothers to read.”88
“Irrelevance”—describing activities of so little concern to most consumers that it
“is like leading a satiated horse to unappealing water.”89
“Opacity”—reflecting the “bedrock truth...that it is difficult to track, let alone
describe, all the information that is exchanged in a typical transaction, all the
places that it is stored, and all the ways that it is used.”90
“Non-comparability”—again reflecting an underlying reality that “the
simplification necessary for comparability comes at a significant cost in accuracy
and flexibility.”91
“Inflexibility”—failing to keep pace with “new business models and new
consumer demands.”92
The problems with the current approach to notices will only expand as data
protection laws are applied to new technologies, such as mobile phones, and
computer chips embedded in cars and household appliances: where will the “clear
and conspicuous” privacy notice be displayed then? “The likely outcome,” as the
U.S. experience has amply demonstrated, is that “privacy policies will produce
information that is unread by Americans and does not affect behavior and will
result in the enrichment of the plaintiffs’ bar with no benefits to consumers.”93
The European experience has proved no more successful. Notices under
European data protection laws are often reduced to mere warnings. One popular
privacy notice throughout London and other European capitals is “Warning:
CCTV in use.” These signs may motivate good behavior, but they do little to
empower individuals to make informed choices about the collection and use of
data about them. Similarly, many European businesses provide brief privacy
notices, often of obvious data collection practices (e.g., “if you reply to this e-mail
we will collect personal data about you”). One British theater ticket service offers
callers the option to opt out of hearing its privacy notice altogether.
Neither approach—loading notices with exceptional detail because they will
serve as contract terms or reducing notices to mere cigarette-pack-like warnings—
has proved very informative or protective of privacy.364
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
The Cost of Choice
The opportunity, much less the requirement, to make choices can impose
considerable burdens on consumers, as well as on businesses seeking consent. U.S.
West reported that it required an average of 4.8 telephone calls per household just
to find an adult who could consent. Moreover, these additional contacts were just
to obtain permission to examine data about customers to determine their eligibility
for a product or service offering. For those individuals who are eligible, a second
round of contacts is necessary to actually make them the offer. For the majority of
people who will not qualify for the offer, the contacts were wasted.
A case study of MBNA Corporation, a large, diversified, multinational
financial institution currently being acquired by Bank of America, provides even
more striking examples.94 MBNA uses personal information to pare down its lists
of prospects in an average year from 800 million to 400 million names.95 If consent
were required, the company would have to contact 800 million people permission
to scrutinize data about them, even though only 50 percent will qualify to receive
an offer. The other 50 percent of contacts will have been wasted. This means, on
average, 400 million Americans would hear from MBNA annually asking for
permission to consider them for an offer for which they are ineligible.
Alternatively, if the company is prohibited from using personal information
because of the inherent difficulty and cost of obtaining opt-in consent from distant
consumers, 109 million people each year would receive solicitations who should
not have.96 These wasted contacts translate into an 18 percent lower response rate
and a 22 percent increase in direct mail costs per account booked—costs that are
likely to be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices.97
Consumers may also be burdened by receiving no contacts. In its telephone
trial, U.S. West never reached 26 percent of its customers and was hung up on
without ever being able to seek opt-in consent by another 28 percent. Fifty-four
percent of the trial population were therefore denied opportunities to receive
information about new products and services.98 When compared with the 72
percent who opted in when the opportunity to consent was presented at the
conclusion of a call that the customer initiated, it is likely that many of those
customers who never knew of the offer might in fact have been interested in it. The
greatest impediment to securing consent was not that customers did not want their
information used, but rather that they never learned of the opportunity or did not
like intrusive or repetitive contacts that the consent requirement necessitated.
Consumers bear other burdens as well, in addition to repetitive and wasteful
contacts. Robert E. Litan, Director of the Economic Studies Program at The
Brookings Institution and a former Deputy Assistant Attorney General, has writtenThe Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
365
that mandatory consent requirements would “dramatically change the way goods
and services are marketed in this country, whether ‘on’ or ‘off’ line. The same
would be true for fund-raising by charitable and public interest organizations,
many of which now purchase customer lists from magazines and other
organizations (commercial and non-commercial).”99
“In all of these cases,” Litan writes, “organizations would have to
painstakingly build solicitation lists from scratch, a task that would be
prohibitively expensive for all but the very largest commercial entities in the
country. One result would be to raise barriers to entry by smaller, and often more
innovative, firms and organizations.”100
The impact may be measured in more than just wasted dollars and time.
Consider medical research, where researchers performing chart review will likely
have had no prior contact with the patient, and the patient will likely no longer be
present in the health care system. To require that the researcher obtain the patient’s
consent means that the researcher will not only face all of the burdens normally
associated with reaching individuals and getting them to respond to a consent
request, but the additional burden of having to do so without the benefit of an
existing relationship or a ready mechanism for communicating with them.
There is also a financial cost to notice and consent regulation. One component
of that cost results from the interference of privacy laws with open information
flows. Ultimately, it is consumers and individuals, in the words of then-Alabama
Attorney General Bill Pryor, who “pay the price in terms of either higher prices for what
they buy, or in terms of a restricted set of choices offered them in the marketplace.”101
Another source of that cost is the burden of complying with notice and choice
laws. Crafting, printing, and mailing the two billion disclosure notices required by
Gramm-Leach-Bliley, for example, is estimated to have cost $2-5 billion.102 Much
of that cost will be incurred annually because the notices must be distributed
annually. During its test of consent mechanisms, U.S. West found that to obtain
permission to use information about its customer’s calling patterns to market
services to them cost almost $30 per customer contacted.103
These costs are not limited to business users of information. A 2002 study by
Michael Turner and Lawrence Buc calculates that the annual cost to charities of
complying with privacy laws requiring explicit consent for the use of personal
information in fund-raising would be $16.5 billion—21 percent of the total amount raised
by U.S. charities in 2000.104366
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
The Benefits of No Choice
In some cases, consent may be undesirable, as well as impractical. This is true of
press coverage of public figures and events, medical research, and of the many
valuable uses of personal information where the benefit is derived from the fact
that the consumer has not had control over the information. This is certainly true of
credit information: its value derives from the fact that the information is obtained
routinely, over time, from sources other than the consumer. Allowing the
consumer to block use of unfavorable information would make the credit report
useless.
In the words of former FTC Chairman Muris: The credit reporting system
“works because, without anybody’s consent, very sensitive information about a
person’s credit history is given to the credit reporting agencies. If consent were
required, and consumers could decide—on a creditor-by-creditor basis—whether
they wanted their information reported, the system would collapse.”105
Moreover, many of these beneficial uses of information that consumers now
enjoy and to which they have the opportunity to consent, depend on spreading the
cost of collecting and maintaining the information over a variety of uses. For
example, commercial intermediaries collect and organize government records, and
make them accessible to the public. Those records are used for many socially
valuable purposes: monitoring government operations, locating missing children,
preventing and detecting crime, apprehending wanted criminals, securing
payments from “deadbeat” parents and spouses, and many others.
If the law restricted the other valuable uses of public records, or made those
uses prohibitively expensive, then the data and systems to access them would not
be in place for any use. Inasmuch as the beneficial uses of information outlined
above are interconnected, and often depend on common systems and spreading the
cost of acquiring and managing data over many uses, consent-based laws may lead
to consumers having fewer opportunities made available to them to which they can
consent.
The Illusion of Choice
Notice and consent requirements often create the illusion, but not the reality, of
meaningful consumer choice. For example, if the notice is never received by the
consumer, the choice it provides is meaningless. Conversely, if consent is required as a
condition for opening an account or obtaining a service, a high response rate can always
be obtained. A useful example are the license terms that computer users encounter when
downloading or installing software. The first window that opens during the installation
process is a notice of terms and conditions, usually relating to intellectual property rights.The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
367
The user is given two options “I Accept” or “I Decline.” Because the installation stalls
until the individual makes a choice, it is not difficult to get him or her to make that
choice. Moreover, because clicking on the “I Decline” button will terminate the
installation process, it is not difficult to prompt the user to choose “I Accept.” Software
manufacturers could accurately claim a 100 percent consent rate to their license terms,
but only because consent is a condition of service.
Financial institutions confronted with explicit consent laws report similar results.
For example, one of the United States’ largest financial institutions has reported that it
has no difficulty complying with consent requirements in European countries, because it
prints the opt-in notice in the account-opening form above the signature line. A
consumer cannot open an account without granting consent.106 “One’s clicking through
a consent screen to signify surrendering of her personal data for all future purposes is an
example of both uninformed consent and a bad bargain.”107
Finally, if the cost of obtaining consent becomes too great to make the proposed use
of information economically feasible, then there will be nothing to which the consumer
can consent. Similarly, if consent requires building new data systems, and implementing
new uses of data, one person at a time, it is likely to make the activity untenable. For
example, if a European company had to obtain the informed, affirmative consent of each
of its employees in order to process its payroll in a non-European country, the existence
of a single hold-out would mean that the company needed to provide an alternative
payroll service, something few employers could afford. When that happens, consent
requirements create only the illusion, not the reality, of choice. As Professor Schwartz
has argued, “social and legal norms about privacy promise too much, namely data
control, and deliver too little.”108
National Law in a Global World
The idea behind FIPPS was that national data protections laws would be
compatible because they would be built on commonly shared principles. As a
result, privacy would be protected without impeding global information flows.
This was the explicitly stated purpose behind the OECD Guidelines, the EU data
protection directive, and the APEC Privacy Framework.
The reality has been quite different. Implementation of these and other FIPPS
has been so divergent that national laws are often incompatible, they often impose
explicit barriers to the international flow of personal data, and they are
increasingly supplemented by state, provincial, and even local data protection
laws. As a result, data protection has grown inconsistent and unpredictable, and
increasingly burdensome to multinational commerce, trade, and information flows.368
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
This is most surprising in Europe, which adopted the data protection directive
to create a uniform standard of data protection across the 15 member states of the
European Union so that “personal data should be able to flow freely from one
Member State to another.”109 The text of the directive stresses this point by
forbidding member states from restricting the flow of personal data among
themselves because of data protection or privacy concerns. But the directive
explicitly restricts data flows to non-European countries lacking “adequate” data
protection, and it allows member states to enact laws that provide greater data
protection internally. The result is wide variation in the laws of European
countries. A 2001 study by London law firm D.J. Freeman found that almost every
member state “was operating its own regime in terms of data laws” with “wide
latitude in the interpretation of the 1995 directive.”110 The end result of applying
national choice-based data protection laws in the context of an increasingly global
society has been called “a maze of conflicting provisions that create a complex, perilous,
and potentially non-navigable environment” for consumers and businesses.111
The United States, as we have seen, has largely reduced the OECD Guidelines
to four principles—notice, choice, access, and security. As a result, its data
protection laws are already widely divergent from those of most other countries. In
addition, because of the federal structure of the government, privacy protection
varies widely state to state and even from city to city. While the federal
government has recently imposed national statutory or regulatory protections for
privacy of financial and health information, these explicitly permit state
governments to adopt more restrictive provisions.
Privacy is increasingly cited as the reason for restricting multinational
information flows. Concerns about privacy protections in other countries have
been raised in debates over outsourcing in the United States, Canada, and
elsewhere. The Canadian province of British Columbia has gone so far as to adopt
a law prohibiting public sector outsourcing of the processing of personal
information outside of Canada.112 Specifically, the law requires each public body
to ensure that “personal information in its custody or under its control is stored
only in Canada and accessed only in Canada.”113
Such inconsistency burdens consumers, who travel, shop, use credit cards, and
engage in a variety of transactions from state to state and country to country. It
also saddles businesses with the cost of identifying which data protection regime
applies to a given act of data processing, understanding the requirements of that
regime, and then applying them appropriately, and the risk of liability if they fail to
reconcile inconsistent data protection requirements appropriately. The problem is
especially true online. The Internet crosses state and national boundaries and has
facilitated truly global markets, yet the technologies of the Internet often make it
impossible to identify in which state or country users are located. The price ofThe Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
369
inconsistent data protection laws is borne by entities that must comply with those
laws and by individuals whose privacy is supposed to be protected by them.
The Distortion of Privacy
The greatest failure of FIPPS as applied today is the substitution of maximizing
consumer choice for the original goal of protecting privacy while permitting data flows.
As a result, the energy of data processors, legislators, and enforcement authorities has
been squandered on notices and often meaningless consent opportunities, rather than on
enhancing privacy. Compliance with data protection laws is increasingly focused on
providing required notices in proper form and at the right time, rather than on ensuring
that personal information is protected.
Of the hundreds of enforcement actions brought in Europe, the United States, and
other countries, few have involved allegations of substantive harms to individuals, while
most have alleged failures to comply with procedural requirements. Meanwhile, serious
risks to consumers, such as the apparent widespread insecurity of personal data, have
gone largely unexamined.
This is a powerful indictment of modern data protection law, and it requires not just
tinkering with notice and choice requirements or rethinking enforcement strategies. It
requires rethinking the purpose of data protection law and reexamining the principles on
which that law is based.
A Modest Proposal
Fair Information Practice Principles have failed in practice. Data protection
regimes built on them are not delivering a high standard of effective, predictable,
and efficient data protection, or meaningful consistency among nations or regions.
Most importantly, as transposed into contemporary privacy laws and regulations,
FIPPS have been used to glorify individual choice as if that, and not appropriate
privacy protection, were the goal of data protection. While privacy advocates and
policymakers cling tenaciously to FIPPS, at least in their rhetoric, the reality is that
FIPPS as applied today largely disserve both privacy and other important societal
interests.
Creating an alternative that works better than FIPPS—whether returning to
earlier FIPPS that did not substitute control for privacy, or identifying new
alternatives—is a difficult undertaking because it requires settling on not only a
more rational data protection regime, but one that can ultimately prove acceptable
to a wide variety of people in very different national settings. This is the critical
task to which this final section attempts to make a modest contribution.114Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
370
The following Consumer Privacy Protection Principles are intended to operate
on two levels. At the higher level, they are designed to help guide the development
of a data protection system and determine the appropriate role of law. At the more
detailed level, they are intended to define what the key elements of data protection
laws should be.
The first three principles establish the purpose of, and constraints on, data
protection and therefore provide the standards for interpreting the other principles
and guiding their implementation.
1.
Prevention of HarmData protection laws should regulate information flows
when necessary to protect individuals from harmful uses of information. Like
other consumer protection laws, data protection law should be designed to
prevent tangible harms to individuals and to provide for appropriate recovery
for those harms if they occur. Tangible harms are defined as damage to
persons or property.
a. Focus on Use—Data protections laws should target harmful uses of
    information, rather than mere possession, and should focus on collection
   only to prevent collection by dishonest or deceptive means. Individuals
  are less likely to be harmed by the mere collection, possession, or transfer
 of accurate information. Moreover, even information that could be used
for harmful purposes may also have uses that are beneficial for the data
subject, the data user, and society as well.
b. Proportionality—Data protection should be proportional to the likelihood
    and severity of the possible harm(s).
c. Per Se Harmful Uses—Where a use is always harmful (e.g., the use of
    personal information to commit fraud), the government should prohibit
   the use outright.
d. Per Se Not Harmful Uses—The government should not regulate uses that
    present no reasonable likelihood of harm.
e. Sensitive Uses—Where a use of personal data is neither “per se harmful”
        nor “per se not harmful,” the government may condition the use on
           obtaining the consent of the data subject(s). Such requirements should be
          reserved for uses of personal data:
i.
that are reasonably and objectively thought to be intrusive,
offensive, or otherwise invade personal privacy;The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
371
ii.
where the intrusion, offense, or other objection is directly related to
the use of personal data; and
iii. where consent likely would be effective.
2.
Benefits MaximizationData protection is not an end in itself, but rather a
tool for enhancing individual and societal welfare. To be effective, data
protection must rest on the recognition that both information flows and
individual privacy have value and are necessary in a democratic society and
market economy. That value benefits individuals as well as society as a
whole. Therefore, the goal of any privacy regime must be to balance the value
of accessible personal information with the value of information privacy to
maximize both individual and public benefits.
a. b. 
3.
No data protection law should be enacted or enforced that does not in fact
significantly serve the purpose for which it was enacted. Laws that are
ineffective or that are enacted without a specific purpose run the risk of
imposing costs without achieving benefits.
Data protection laws should not be enacted or enforced if they are
substantially more burdensome or broader than necessary to serve that
purpose. Such laws by definition impose costs in excess of the benefits
they achieve. Similarly, some data protection laws, even if narrow and
precise, may necessarily impose costs that exceed their benefits.
Consistent ProtectionIndividuals should enjoy privacy protection that is as
consistent as possible across types of data, settings, and jurisdictions.
a. Data protection laws should reflect broadly accepted, rational principles.
b. To facilitate consistency and predictability in data protection,
  governments should avoid inconsistent or overlapping local laws or
 regulations, or overlapping enforcement actions.
c. Where possible, data protection laws should be adopted at the highest
  practical level (e.g., national instead of local or provincial), and laws
 should be harmonized to the greatest extent possible in an effort to
achieve consistent, if not uniform, national standards.
d. Data protection laws should not impose special burdens on the
  transborder flow of personal data and should not create special or greater
 obligations outside of the jurisdiction in which the law operates than
apply within the jurisdiction. Rather than seeking to impose
extraterritorial legal obligations on data flows in other countries, national
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
372
data protection laws and authorities should focus instead on mutual
recognition of concurrent national regimes. Compliance with the data
protection laws of one country should satisfy the requirements of all
other national laws that are based on the same principles.
The remaining principles describe in broad terms the legal obligations of data
protection:
4.
Transparency, Honesty, and AccountabilityEntities should collect, use, or
transfer personal data honestly and only in compliance with applicable law
and with any stated or reasonably implied undertakings.
a. b. Entities that collect personal data to complete a transaction or provide a
     product or service requested by an individual should (i) collect and use
    no more information than is reasonably necessary, and (ii) use or transfer
   that information in the future only for compatible purposes.
c. If personal data are collected or used based on the consent of the data
  subject, consent may not be required as a condition of providing a
 product or service unless the information is actually necessary for that
purpose.
d. Personal data should be collected from third parties only in compliance
  with applicable law and with any stated or reasonably implied
 undertakings by the third party to the data subject and by the entity
seeking the data to the third party. If the data are used in any manner that
could reasonably cause tangible harm to the data subject, the data subject
should be provided with notice as to the source, content, and use of the
data.
e. 
5.
Personal data should be collected from data subjects openly. If the
collection from data subjects is not reasonably obvious, then there should
be prominent notice of the fact. If data collection is reasonably obvious,
additional notice requirements are superfluous.
Entities should be accountable at law for their use of personal
information and for the activities of entities that process data on their
behalf.
Integrity of Personal Information—Personal information should be accurate,
complete and kept up-to-date consistent with how it is used. The level of
accuracy, completeness, and timeliness should reflect the likelihood that the
information could be used to cause harm and the severity of the likely harm.The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
373
6. SecurityPersonal data which could reasonably be used to harm individuals
    should be secured against accidental or deliberate loss, misuse, alteration, or
   destruction. The level of security should reflect the likelihood that the
  information could be used to cause harm and the severity of the likely harm.
 Legal requirements concerning security should be technology-neutral and
avoid interfering with the development and use of new measures.
7. Liability—Entities that collect and otherwise process personal information
    should be liable for reasonably foreseeable actual damages resulting from
   their harmful use or misuse. Such entities should be liable only if the harm
  results from their negligent, willful, or intentional behavior. Liability should
 never be determined under a strict liability standard, or when the harm was
not reasonably foreseeable or could not reasonably have been prevented.
8. Effective and Efficient EnforcementEnforcement of data protection laws
    should achieve effective compliance with these principles and applicable law,
   as efficiently as possible, while minimizing the burden on individuals or
  interference with the benefits they enjoy.
a. The goal of enforcement should be to achieve a high degree of com-
  pliance and to compensate victims for actual harms suffered as a result of
 misuse of personal information, without imposing unnecessary burdens
on individuals or the responsible, lawful use of personal information.
b. It is important that enforcement not create a disincentive for attempting
  to comply with the law, by unfairly focusing on responsible users who try
 and fail or by ignoring harmful uses of data that may be more difficult to
prosecute. Enforcement actions should target information processors that
contribute directly and materially to the harmful use of personal
information.
c. Data protection laws should not permit overlapping or duplicative
  enforcement actions. Enforcement should be as efficient as possible. To
 that end, governments should seek to avoid duplicative or overlapping
enforcement actions.
Collectively, CPPPS are intended to focus data protection on those situations
where it is most necessary, but to ensure that in those situations, the law will
provide substantive protections, not merely hollow notices and opportunities for
consent. They are designed to provide individuals with sufficient notice of data
processing activities and sufficient protection so that they can make intelligent,
self-reliant decisions, but not to use those decisions as a substitute for substantive374
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
protection where needed. And they are calculated to provide sufficient, targeted
liability so that data processors will have meaningful incentives, rather than pages
of bureaucratic regulations, to motivate appropriate behavior, and that individuals
will be compensated when processing results in serious harm.
This approach reflects other provisions of consumer protection law,
particularly the focus on tangible harms, the requirement of some form of causality
or requirement before liability is found, and the reliance on substantive rather than
procedural protections. For example, fraud law in the United States typically
requires (1) false representation of material fact; (2) knowledge by the seller that
the information is false; (3) intent for buyer to rely upon false information, (4)
reasonable reliance on behalf of the buyer; and (5) injury resulting from the
buyer’s reliance on the false information.115 But liability flows when these
conditions are found. As a general matter, consumers cannot consent to be
defrauded and notice of intent to defraud is not a defense.
The CPPPS also reflect elements of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, which rely
on notice and consent only in a limited way and with regard to specific
activities.116 Instead, the Act restricts the use of consumer report information to
statutorily specific “permissible purposes,” and imposes strict requirements on
furnishers and users of that information concerning its accuracy. It is not a perfect
model and is certainly too bureaucratic and restrictive for many uses of
information that present little risk to individuals, but it is a useful example.
Privacy law is not unique. It is important and it touches on many values—
including both privacy and the free flow of information—that civilized societies
care about, but it can certainly be informed by other laws that also deal with
important values. Experience in those analogous areas might help us not only
formulate more workable principles, but also translate them into law more
faithfully and consistently.
Conclusion
Modern privacy law is often expensive, bureaucratic, burdensome, and offers
surprisingly little protection for privacy. It has substituted individual control of
information, which it in fact rarely achieves, for privacy protection. In a world
rapidly becoming more global through information technologies, multinational
commerce, and rapid travel, data protection laws have grown more fractured and
protectionist. Those laws have become unmoored from their principled basis, and
the principles on which they are based have become so varied and procedural, that
our continued intonation of the FIPPS mantra no longer obscures the fact that this
emperor indeed has few if any clothes left.The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
375
We can do better. The key is refocusing FIPPS on substantive tools for
protecting privacy, and away from notice and consent; leveling the playing field
between information processors and data subjects; and created sufficient, but
limited, liability so that data processors will have meaningful incentives, rather
than bureaucratic regulations, to motivate appropriate behavior, and that
individuals will be compensated when processing results in serious harm. This is
only a first step. These proposed Consumer Privacy Protection Principles are
undoubtedly incomplete and imperfect, but they are an effort to return to a more
meaningful dialogue about the legal regulation of privacy and the value of
information flows in the face of explosive growth in technological capabilities in
an increasingly global society.
Notes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
The author is grateful for the thoughtful comments of his colleagues, Peggy
Eisenhauer and Marty Abrams, and for the excellent research assistance of Anne
Tucker. The author alone is responsible for any errors that remain.
See, e.g., In the Matter of Eli Lilly and Company, FTC File No. 012 3214 (Jan. 18,
2002) (agreement containing consent order).
Paul M. Schwartz, “Privacy and Democracy in Cyberspace,” 52 Vanderbilt Law
Review 1607, 1614 (1999). Professor Schwartz describes FIPPS as being
“centered around four key principles: (1) defined obligations that limit the use of
personal data; (2) transparent processing systems; (3) limited procedural and
substantive rights; and (4) external oversight.” Id.
Marc Rotenberg, “Fair Information Practices and the Architecture of Privacy:
What Larry Doesn’t Get,” 2001 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 1 ¶ 43.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Report of the Secretary’s
Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems, Records, Computer,
and the Rights of Citizens (1973).
Id. at viii.
The Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a.
The Privacy Protection Study Commission, Personal Privacy in an Information
Society (1977).
Id. at 14.
Id. at 16.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id. at 17.
Id.
Id.376
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
Id. at 14-15.
Id. at 17.
Id.
Id. at 18.
Id. at 19.
Id. at 15.
Id. at 20.
Id.
Id. at 20-21.
O.E.C.D. Doc. (C 58 final) (Oct. 1, 1980).
Id. at preface.
Id.
Id. ¶¶ 7-15.
Com(92)422 Final SYN 287 (Oct. 15, 1992).
Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community, Mar. 25, 1957, 28
U.N.T.S. 3, art. 2 (1958), as amended by the Single European Act, O.J. L 169/1
(1987), [1987] 2 C.M.L.R. 741, and the Treaty on European Union, Feb. 7, 1992,
O.J. C 224/01 (1992), [1992] C.M.L.R. 719, reprinted in 31 I.L.M. 247 (1992).
Treaty on European Union, Feb. 7, 1992, O.J. C 224/01 (1992), [1992] C.M.L.R.
719, reprinted in 31 I.L.M. 247 (1992).
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on
the Free Movement of Such Data (Eur. O.J. 95/L281). See generally Christopher
Kuner, European Data Privacy Law and Online Business (2003).
Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of
Personal Data, Working Document on Transfers of Personal Data to Third
Countries: Applying Articles 25 and 26 of the EU Data Protection Directive (July
24, 1998).
EU Data Protection Directive, supra note 35, art. 8.
Transfers of Personal Data to Third Countries, supra note 36.
EU Data Protection Directive, supra note 35, art. 18.
Transfers of Personal Data to Third Countries, supra note 36.
15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1).
Federal Trade Commission, Privacy Online: A Report to Congress 7 (1998).
Id. at 7-10 (citations omitted).
Federal Trade Commission, Privacy Online: Fair Information Practices in the
Electronic Marketplace—A Report to Congress 11 (2000).
Asia-Pacific
Economic
Cooperation,
APEC
Privacy
Framework,
2004/AMM/014rev1 (Nov. 2004). The author participated in drafting early
versions of the framework for the U.S. government.
Id. at 8-19.
OECD Guidelines, supra note 28.
Alan F. Westin, Privacy and Freedom 7 (1967).
William Safire, “Nosy Parker Lives,” New York Times, Sept. 23, 1999, at A29.
OECD Guidelines, supra note 28, at ¶ 7.The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
377
EU Data Protection Directive, supra note 35, Preamble, ¶ 25.
APEC Privacy Framework, supra note 45, at 12.
Schwartz, supra note 3, at 1659.
FTC, Privacy Online (2000), supra note 44.
OECD Guidelines, supra note 28.
FTC, Privacy Online (1998), supra note 42, at 3-4. See generally Fred H. Cate,
The Privacy Problem: A Broader View of Information Privacy and the Costs and
Consequences of Protecting It, The Freedom Forum (2003).
See Fred H. Cate & Robert Litan “Constitutional Issues in Information Privacy,” 9
Michigan Technology & Telecommunications Law Review 35 (2002).
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Services Modernization Act, 106 Pub. L. No. 102,
113 Stat. 1338 (1999).
Id. § 503(b).
Id. §§ 502(b)(2), (e).
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information, 65 Fed.
Reg. 82,462 (2000) (HHS, final rule) (codified at 45 C.F.R. pt. 160, §§ 164.502,
164.506).
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information, 67 Fed.
Reg. 43,181 (2002) (HHS, final rule) (codified at 45 C.F.R. pt. 160, §§ 164.502,
164.506).
45 C.F.R. § 164.504.
Id.
45 C.F.R. § 164.506(a).
Id. § 164.105(c)(2).
Id. § 164.508(a)(1).
Id. § 164.508(c).
Id. § 164.508(a)(2)(iv).
Id. § 164.510.
Id.
Id. § 164.512.
EU Data Protection Directive, supra note 35 at art. 7(a).
Id., art. 8(2)(a).
Id., art. 26(1)(a).
“Briefs,” Circulation Management, May 1999 (referring to the U.S. Postal
Service’s Household Diary Study (1997)).
Declaration of Fred H. Cate, Bank of America v. Daly City, 279 F. Supp. 2d 1118
(N.D. Cal. 2003), at 2.
Ex parte letter from Kathryn Krause to Dorothy Attwood (Sep. 9, 1997), In the
Matter of Implementation of the Telecommunications Act of 1996;
Telecommunications Carriers’ Use of Customer Proprietary Network Information
and Other Customer Information; Implementation of Non-Accounting Safeguards
of Sections 271 and 272 of the Communications Act of 1934, as Amended, 63
Fed. Reg. 20,326 (1998) (FCC, second Report and Order and Further Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking). U.S. West calculated that the trial had a margin of error
less than 2 percent. Brief for Petitioner and Intervenors at 16 n.37, U.S. West v.378
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
Consumer Protection in the Age of the Information Economy
FCC, 182 F.3d 1224 (10th Cir. 1999), cert. denied 528 U.S. 1188 (2000).
Brief for Petitioner and Intervenors, supra note 78, at 10-11.
Federal Trade Commission, Workshop on the Information Marketplace: Merging
and Exchanging Consumer Data, Mar. 31, 2001 (comments of Ted Wham).
Saul Hansell, “Compressed Data: The Big Yahoo Privacy Storm That Wasn’t,”
New York Times, May 13, 2002, at C4.
Hearing on Financial Privacy and Consumer Protection, Senate Comm. on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 107th Cong. (Sept. 19, 2002) (statements of
Fred H. Cate and John Dugan).
“Survey: Compliance with GLB Act Costs Smaller Banks More Money,”
Consumer Financial Services Law Report, Feb. 14, 2002.
Star Systems, Financial Privacy: Beyond Title V of Gramm-Leach-Bliley, 2002, p.
9.
Timothy J. Muris, Protecting Consumers’ Privacy: 2002 and Beyond, Privacy
2001 Conference, Oct. 4, 2001.
Fred H. Cate, Opt-In Exposed, American Banker’s Association (2002), at 10.
“Confusing Privacy Notices Leave Consumers Exposed,” USA Today, July 9,
2001, p 13A.
Kent Walker, “The Costs of Privacy,” 25 Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy
87, 107 (2001).
Id. at 108.
Id. at 110.
Id. at 111.
Id. at 112.
Id. at 113.
Michael E. Staten & Fred H. Cate, “The Impact of Opt-In Privacy Rules on Retail
Credit Markets: A Case Study of MBNA,” 52 Duke Law Journal 745 (2003)
Id. at 771.
Id. at 775.
Id.
Brief for Petitioner and Intervenors, supra note 78, at 15-16.
Robert E. Litan, Balancing Costs and Benefits of New Privacy Mandates, AEI-
Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies Working Paper 99-3, at 11 (1999).
Id.
Bill Pryor, Protecting Privacy: Some First Principles, Remarks at the American Council
of Life Insurers Privacy Symposium, July 11, 2000, Washington, DC, at 4.
Hearing on Financial Privacy and Consumer Protection, supra (statement of Fred
H. Cate).
Brief for Petitioner and Interveners, supra note 78, at 15-16.
Michael A. Turner & Lawrence G. Buc, The Impact of Data Restrictions on Fund-raising
for Charitable & Nonprofit Institutions 2-3 (2002).
Muris, supra note 85.
Cate Declaration, supra note 77, at 7.
Schwartz, supra note 3, at 1678.
Id. at 1677.The Failure of Fair Information Practice Principles
379
109 EU Data Protection Directive, supra note 35, Preamble, ¶ 3.
110 “ASPs Warn: EU Data Protection Laws Fail to Keep Pace With Technology,”
Business Wire, March 6, 2001.
111 Hearing on the EU Data Protection Directive: Implications for the U.S.
Privacy Debate, Subcom. on Commerce, Trade and Consumer Protection
of the House Comm. on Energy and Commerce, 108th Cong. (Mar. 8,
2001) (statement of Jonathan Winer).
112 Bill 73—the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act,
British Columbia, 2004.
113 Id. § 30.1. See also Information and Privacy Commissioner of British Columbia,
Privacy and the USA Patriot Act: Implications for British Columbia Public Sector
Outsourcing (Oct. 2004)
114 For another example of pragmatic thinking about privacy principles, which has
influenced the recommendations below, see Fred H. Cate, Margaret P. Eisenhauer
& Christopher Kuner, “A Proposal for a Global Privacy Protection Framework,”
Consumer Protection Update, American Bar Association 18 (Sum. 2003).
115 See Gene A. Marsh, Consumer Protection Law in a Nutshell (1999).
116 15 U.S.C. § 1681b.